Docs 719: combined TPC updates (#1035)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/cluster-performance/pages/thread-per-core-tpc.adoc

= Thread-Per-Core (TPC)
:description: Find out more about Thread-Per-Core (TPC) and how to enable this feature on clients and cluster members.
:page-enterprise: true

> Enable Thread-Per-Core (TPC) on both clients and cluster members to improve system performance, especially on machines with either fewer or more CPU cores than the recommended hardware listed on the xref:ROOT:production-checklist.adoc[].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable Thread-Per-Core (TPC) on both clients and cluster members to improve system performance. This is especially effective if the number of CPU cores on your machines does not match the recommended hardware in the xref:ROOT:production-checklist.adoc[].  
```

Author: Actually, production checklist states 'at least 8' so we do need to revert this or clarify the overall recommendation...

[[tpc-what]]
== What is Thread-Per-Core (TPC)?

The threading model is responsible for networking, storage and compute, which means it has a big impact on system performance. With Staged Event-Driven Architecture (SEDA) you have dedicated threads that do one particular task (for example, reading from a socket or evaluating a map.get) and thread pools that manage these threads.  

> SEDA can lead to throughput and latency issues on machines with limited cores (fewer than 8), as the frequent context switching and state sharing can add significant overhead. Conversely, on machines with a very high number of CPUs (more than 32), a bottleneck can be created by the limited number of I/O threads vs. operation threads. Typically, smaller servers are more readily available through virtualization and for cloud-specific workloads, which can limit system performance in a SEDA environment. 

Reviewer: The bottleneck on more than 32 stated here should be reflected in the Hardware Recommendations of the Production Checklist topic.

And, you know I'm going to complain about vs. - how about compared to? Or, "a bottleneck can occur due to the difference in the available threads used for IO and operations"?

What do you mean by "readily available"? They remain available for use, they are easier to setup/manage/use in virtual and cloud environments, or they are more commonly used in these environments?

Author: > The bottleneck on more than 32 stated here should be reflected in the Hardware Recommendations of the Production Checklist topic.

Possibly...I was trying to keep the TPC changes controlled as I don't know if we're ready to change our overall recommendations (slightly more ambitious scope). We should have a link to TPC from checklist topic anyway.

What do you think @pveentjer ?

I think the 'readily available' comment refers to cost/availability considerations when using cloud i.e. you pay more for higher core machines so bang per buck does lead to less cores.

(vs. is listed in the MS guide and you know I'm going to highlight the inconsistency vs. i.e. and e.g.)

Reviewer 2: There is no simple answer. If the workload is CPU intensive like query processing, TPC will not make any difference. So in that case, with TPC disabled, going for a heavy machine still makes sense.

But if the interactions are simple point interactions (not long-running tasks) then yes, the higher the CPU count, you quickly run into diminishing returns on heavier machines with classic.

Also it depends on the workload. In 5.4 there are only TPC connections between clients/members. And this will speed up readonly operations because they are not bottlenecked by the member/member connections.

If it will be decided to include member/member TPC connections, also update heavy workloads, dumb clients, CP can speed up because they rely on the member/member connection which very quickly becomes a bottleneck.

> A Thread-Per-Core (TPC) design uses one thread for every CPU core and every thread does everything. With each TPC thread able to do networking/storage/compute, scaling is mostly a case of increasing the number of threads to spread the work. This means you can scale up and down easily based on the number of available cores, and make more efficient use of resources on machines with either a low or high number of cores. Every task is non-blocking and you can scale vertically much easier, which means high throughput, low latency and significantly improved system performance.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Thread-Per-Core (TPC) design uses one thread for every CPU core and every thread does everything. With each TPC thread able to do networking/storage/compute, scaling is mostly a case of increasing the number of threads to spread the work. This means you can scale up and down based on the number of available cores, and make more efficient use of resources on machines with either a low or high number of cores. Every task is non-blocking and you can scale vertically smoothly, which means high throughput, low latency and significantly improved system performance.  
```

Reviewer: I just don't like telling the user something is easy/easier - that might not be their perception ;-)

Author: Hmm, I know what you mean but this more a case of the system finding it easier rather than anything you/a human does, which is not reflected by my "you can scale" comment admittedly. Will amend the text...

> When TPC is enabled, smart clients will connect to the configured number of cores (default is 1). If TPC is enabled on both client and server, the client will connect directly to one of the TPC threads instead of using the legacy network threads. TPC-enabled servers will continue using the same ports for discovery, which means there's no difference in how the cluster member list is created and TPC-aware servers will be backwards compatible with clients not using TPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When TPC is enabled, smart clients will connect to the configured number of cores (default is 1). If TPC is enabled on both client and server, the client connect directly to one of the TPC threads instead of using the legacy network threads. TPC-enabled servers continue to use the same ports for discovery, which means there's no difference in how the cluster member list is created and TPC-aware servers are backward compatible with clients that don't use TPC.
```

> NOTE: Unisocket clients will ignore TPC and connect to a random member in the cluster. You must use smart clients with TPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Unisocket clients ignore TPC and connect to a random member in the cluster. You must use smart clients with TPC.
```

[[tpc-config]]
== Configuration Options

> TPC is disabled by default and must be enabled on **each** cluster member and client.  

Reviewer: also not a fan of emphasis - folk either read it or they don't. Style guide discussion for later, though

> NOTE: If you configure a client with TPC and the server doesn't support it, or if you configure a client without TPC and the server supports it, TPC will be ignored in both cases (server and client will still communicate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you configure a client with TPC and the server doesn't support it, or if you configure a client without TPC and the server supports it, TPC is ignored in both cases (server and client can still communicate).
```

TIP: For example configuration files (XML and YAML) with TPC enabled, see xref:configuration:configuring-declaratively.adoc[].  

=== Enabling TPC on Members

> To enable TPC on a Hazelcast cluster member, you need to set the `tpc` system property to true.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable TPC on a Hazelcast cluster member, you need to set the `tpc` system property to `true` as follows:
```

> You can do this by using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using the following command:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

```
-Dhazelcast.internal.tpc.enabled=true
```

> Or by setting these variables within your configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updating your configuration file with the following:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

[tabs] 
==== 
XML:: 
+ 
-- 
[source,xml]
----
<tpc enabled="true">
    <eventloop-count>12</eventloop-count> <1>
</tpc>
----
--

YAML::
+
[source,yaml]
----
 tpc:
    enabled: true
    eventloop-count: 12 <1>
----
====

> <1> The eventloop-count property sets a maximum number of eventloops (an eventloop is essentially a loop that processes events; normally you have one-per-core). This will default to the number of available CPU cores, assuming your license supports that number of eventloops (license limit will override). In environments with a very large number of cores, reducing the eventloop-count may increase performance due to better batching and less packet-processing overhead.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The eventloop-count property sets a maximum number of eventloops (an eventloop is essentially a loop that processes events; normally you have one-per-core). This defaults to the number of available CPU cores, assuming your license supports that number of eventloops (license limit overrides the value). In environments with a very large number of cores, reducing the eventloop-count can increase performance due to better batching and less packet-processing overhead.  
```

=== Enabling TPC on Clients

> To enable TPC on a Hazelcast client, you need to set the `tpc` system property to true.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable TPC on a Hazelcast client, you need to set the `tpc` system property to true, as follows:
```

> You can do this by using the following command:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using the following command:  
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
```

```
-Dhazelcast.client.tpc.enabled=true
```

> Or by setting this variable within your client configuration file:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updating your client configuration file with the following:  
```
